Work finally underway on $3.5B bridge
Site preparation taking place in Delta and Richmond, but 10-lane crossing won’t open until 2022
Work is now underway for the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project.

Preliminary construction has begun on the 10-lane bridge and associated road works with site preparation in order to improve ground conditions for future lane widening in Delta and Richmond. The site preparation includes ditch improvements and the placement of preload material on soft soils immediately adjacent to the existing highway corridor.

Hall Constructors was awarded the $11.5 million contract by the provincial government. Delta council recently agreed to relax the noise bylaw so the preload work can take place between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. along Highway 99 from Highway 17 to 104th Street.

Work that will be done overnight, and possibly weekends as well, includes placement of concrete barriers, removal of soil and placement of preload.

Delta staff have asked the company to notify neighbouring property owners in advance of the work.

The duration of the project is scheduled for approximately six to nine months but the approved noise variance is for just six months. Council may be provided with a future report to extend the noise variance, at which time staff will provide an update on any community noise impacts.

Meanwhile, B&B Heavy Civil Construction was awarded a $5.8 million contract for site preparation in Richmond along Highway 99, between Bridgeport Road and Steveston Highway.

Last week, Transportation Minister Todd Stone was in Delta for a media event to celebrate the start of construction, but the groundbreaking had to be cancelled when vocal protestors showed up. He insisted the project was much needed for Delta and the rest of the south of the Fraser communities.

Mayor Lois Jackson was also on hand at the event, which had to be moved indoors, staunchly supporting the $3.5-billion bridge project, which is scheduled for completion in 2022.

Last week, the Musqueam First Nation said the project lies in the heart of their territory and the government has not received their consent to proceed. Across the river, the Tsawwassen First Nation is supporting the project. 