About the Massey Tunnel Replacement Project.
The Project scope  includes a new bridge and related Highway 99 improvements between Bridgeport Road in Richmond and Highway 91 in Delta. The Province plans to fund the Project at least in part with user tolls. Funding partnerships are also being explored.
Construction is expected to begin in 2017, with the new bridge completed by 2022.
The project definition report and business case were developed following three years of technical and engineering work, two phases of consultation and ongoing meetings with stakeholder groups.
Why is the Project needed?
The George Massey Tunnel is a key component of the regional and provincial transportation system, carrying an average of 80,000 vehicles each day. In response to growing concerns about the impact of congestion, and recognizing that the existing tunnel has about 10 years of useful life remaining, the Province of British Columbia has committed to constructing a replacement crossing.
The new bridge and Highway 99 improvements will serve current and forecast demand for travel for many decades to come. This includes transit reliability improvements and a pedestrian and cycling pathway to help increase use of non-car transportation alternatives. The new bridge also will serve as a lifeline structure in the event of a significant seismic event.
The Ministry also has invested in short-term improvements, including lengthening the Steveston off-ramp on Highway 99 at the north end of the George Massey Tunnel. This will improve safety and reduce Highway 99 congestion for motorists at this location.
Project Benefits
Key Project benefits include:
Travel time savings – the average commuter will save up to 30 minutes a day
Travel time reliability – with no rush hour delays, and improved accessibility throughout the day
Improved safety – an estimated 35 per cent reduction in collisions
Improved trade and commerce – with improved travel time reliability and improved access between Delta and Richmond distribution centres
Improved transit – dedicated transit/HOV lanes between Bridgeport Road in Richmond and Highway 91 in Delta, new transit-only ramps at Bridgeport Road to improve access to Canada Line, and integrated transit stops at the Steveston Highway and Highway 17A interchanges
Improved cycling and pedestrian access – with a new multi-use pathway for cyclists and pedestrians that will provide safe and convenient access between Delta and Richmond and connect to the existing network at River Road in Delta and Steveston Highway in Richmond
Improved environment – connecting portions of Deas Island Regional Park that are currently separated by the Tunnel infrastructure, improvements in Green Slough, bio-filtration of stormwater on the bridge, habitat enhancements on both sides of the bridge, lower per-trip fuel consumption, and reduced vehicle idling.

