ANALYSIS OF GEORGE MASSEY TUNNEL REPLACEMENT PROJECT.
A comprehensive review of Metro Vancouver’s interests and the potential anticipated impacts of the Project on Metro Vancouver assets, infrastructure and legislated responsibilities is provided below. This analysis has been prepared based on available but limited information regarding this Project.
Air Quality and Climate Change.
The proposed Project will result in changes in the levels of emissions of common air pollutants, toxic air pollutants and greenhouse gases. The changes in emission levels may lead to direct impacts in the vicinity of the Project, including exposure to harmful pollutants, as well as impacts in the regional air shed, including smog and reduced visual air quality.   The current analysis of Project‐related air quality and greenhouse gas impacts is inadequate. The analysis needs to examine traffic impacts across a broader study area to assess changes in traffic volumes and congestion at other points in the regional transportation system, and the associated changes in emissions and resultant environmental impacts. The analysis also needs to consider a range of future traffic scenarios to improve public confidence and address any criticisms of the selection of optimistic scenarios for the analysis. The MOTI’s Application also indicates that “Air quality comprises one of the ‘steps’ along the pathway of effects of the Project, with human health identified as the ultimate receptor of Project‐related effects.” With this statement in mind, and consideration of the concerns identified with respect to the analysis of air quality impacts, there are consequential concerns about the basis for the analysis of air quality‐related health impacts.
Environment.
Construction of the Project as proposed (including the BC Hydro transmission line relocation) and the decommissioning of the Tunnel may have impacts on land and marine environments with ecological importance, and may directly affect fish and wildlife, and their habitat. The Fraser River estuary is the single most important area of aquatic bird and raptor habitat in British Columbia; Deas Island hosts one of the largest and most significant bat colonies in the Lower Mainland; and the intertidal marshes found in the Fraser River estuary provide critical rearing areas for juvenile salmon. Potential direct environmental impacts include: Changes in fish habitat quality due to acoustic effects, changes in ambient water quality, induced turbidity, riverbed lowering, and local scouring. Direct mortality and disturbance to upland birds (for example, destruction of raptor and passerine nests). Habitat loss and direct mortality of terrestrial wildlife during vegetation clearing and grubbing, stripping, and soil excavation. Potential indirect and cumulative environmental impacts include: ‐ An increase of impervious surface area and stormwater runoff entering the river which could increase concentrations of nutrients, organics, metals, chlorides, bacteria, and hydrocarbons. ‐ The reduction of and changes to existing fish and wildlife habitat quality due to acoustic effects, changes to ambient water quality, and the permanent placement of in‐stream piers in Deas Slough, piers adjacent to Green Slough, and temporary bridge structures during construction. Permanent habitat alteration and loss as well as disturbance to wildlife (mainly birds and bats) due to increased noise levels and increased ambient light environment from vehicle traffic. Potential for indirect habitat disturbance through the introduction of invasive species by construction vehicles or equipment. ‐ Impacts on agricultural lands, which provide habitat and other ecological health values. The possibility of additional impacts from additional dredging in the Fraser River following Tunnel decommissioning. 
Fraser River Dredging.
The proposed decommissioning of the Tunnel raises the possibility that additional dredging may occur in the Fraser River. While very little information is known about future potential dredging plans, the impact of any increased dredging on the Fraser River estuary, GVWD and GVS&DD marine crossings of the Fraser River, and land uses along the Fraser River could be significant. 