BC NDP questions Massey Tunnel replacement project.
The BC Liberals are expected to present their fifth-straight balanced budget when they unveil the details later today but at the same time, the plan for one of the government’s largest capital projects seems to have a few holes in it.
New documents just released via a Freedom of information request reveal some unanswered questions about the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project.
The BC NDP made the request but the party says it has come back with some important information missing.
Richmond-Queensborough NDP candidate Aman Singh says information about the risk and cost assessment portions are blank.
“Essentially, the only thing that’s shown on this, there is a lot of information shown on here, but really most of it is just fluff.”
He believes the provincial government is hiding the information for the 3.3 kilometers project.
“If they really truly believe that this is the right decision, well give us the information so that we can look at the evidence. Be transparent about it. But, the fact that this is all redacted, makes me think that even they know that they’re making the wrong decision.”
The province estimates construction of the 10-lane bridge between Richmond and Delta and connecting interchanges will begin this year. The cost of the project is thought to be about $3.5 billion
The Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure has provided NEWS 1130 with the following comment:
“From the outset, we’ve committed to being as open and transparent on the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project as possible. Throughout the project, ministry officials have met regularly with municipalities, First Nations, elected officials and other stakeholders to keep them informed. Over the last four years, we’ve posted more than 14,000 pages of information related to the Project to our website at www.masseytunnel.ca. This includes a large number of supporting documents like the Project Definition Report, Business Case and numerous others. We’ll continue to post information as it becomes available, and our regular meetings with stakeholders will continue. We are working through a detailed procurement process for the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project, and have invited three pre-qualified bidding teams to participate in the Request for Proposals (RFP) stage.
We have not yet released the financial information and our detailed cost estimates from the business case while the RFP process is underway – in order to get the best possible price for the taxpayer. As an example of this on a smaller scale: if you were to build a house and were trying to get the best possible price from a contractor, you would not release the details of your own cost estimate to the contractors before you awarded the contract. However, once the RFP process is finished, we will release the contract details of the successful team and as much additional information as possible that will not harm our ongoing negotiating position with the successful contractor. We anticipate a contractor will be chosen by the summer of 2017, with major construction starting later in the year.”
