Delta mayor has hope for bridge.
Local delegation met with new transportation minister to discuss $3.5-billion project
Mayor Lois Jackson remains hopeful the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project won't be killed following what she describes as a productive meeting last Thursday with new Transportation Minister Claire Trevena.
Joined by CAO George Harvie and police Chief Neil Dubord, Jackson met Trevena in downtown Vancouver to discuss the $3.5-billion project. The six-term mayor said it was a good discussion about traffic congestion, transit improvements and traffic safety issues.
The Delta delegation provided a recently assembled large volume of third-party studies that outline the need for a new crossing and how the bridge is the most cost-effective and will have the least environmental impact.
Jackson, who said the minister committed to reviewing the information, was encouraged following the meeting.
"She was very cordial and very gracious in meeting us and giving us lots of time. We had many points that we wanted to make and impress upon her that she has a very big job. She's certainly looking at all of the files and we're very grateful for that," she said.
As far as the possibility the new NDP government will delay the project indefinitely while it reevaluates options, Jackson said, "We actually said we would like her to extend anything that is in the works in order that she has lots of time to do a real good analysis on her own of all of the reports that have been tabled. There's something like 145 engineering reports in that big file.
We're really hopeful that with all the facts and information they will move forward."
Jackson said it's not clear at this point when the minister will be making a recommendation on the project.
Almost all the other regional mayors have voiced opposition to the 10-lane bridge and Metro Vancouver recently reiterated that stance by requesting work be suspended. Richmond made a similar request, asking the province to review a pair of crossing alternatives. One of the options is to twin the existing tunnel, which would be seismically upgraded, with another four-lane tunnel that would have two lanes dedicated for HOV. The second option is for another tunnel that has just two lanes, strictly for HOV and future rapid transit. Richmond staff maintain both options can be built within the bridge's $3.5-billion budget.
In a recent letter to the Optimist, Richmond Mayor Malcolm Brodie noted his staff plan to meet with Trevena to present those alternatives.
"He (Brodie) seems to feel he has to continue to dig at Delta for unknown reasons. He's got more people than we are that are affected and I just don't understand his vociferous attitude toward us. It's quite unbecoming, in my opinion," Jackson added.
According to Delta, the tunnel, which is a provincial asset, needs to be viewed not only from a regional but a provincial perspective. The need for the new bridge does not detract from the need to continue to develop and invest in public transit and other alternative forms of transit, Jackson said.
A report on Delta's recent presentations will be discussed at the August 14 meeting of Delta council.