Delta urging bridge replacement project to proceed.
Postponing or even cancelling the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project will have serious implications for the entire Metro Vancouver region.
So says the Corporation of Delta following the release of a detailed report Thursday urging the provincial government to proceed, without delay, the construction of the new bridge crossing.
“Our concern and the information we have, which shows the inherent risk from our professional engineers, we have that information and as a public official, it is my duty and our duty to ensure the public sees these reports,” said Delta CAO George Harvie. “It is very obvious over the last number of months that the bridge situation has become a political subject and the information from people like Richmond councillor Carol Day is totally incorrect. They have not reviewed or had their staff review all the information that is available on the Internet that shows this tunnel is a public risk right now.”
The 400-plus page report, entitled The Public Safety and Economic Imperative for the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project, provides a detailed background into the project, the studies that have been completed and what Delta describes as the many compelling arguments for the need to replace the aging tunnel.
“The purpose of this report is to ensure that the general public and decision makers associated with the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project are acutely aware of the serious safety concerns associated with any potential delay in replacing the George Massey Tunnel with a bridge,” says the report. “The potential for a catastrophic failure of the tunnel is real, supported by many professional engineering reports, and any failure of the structure could have potentially devastating public safety and economic impacts for the entire region. It is imperative that the Province moves forward with the new bridge as soon as possible without delaying any decisions.”
Delta says the need to replace the existing tunnel has been studied in exhaustive detail throughout the three-year environmental assessment process, a process which included 145 technical and scientific reports and more than 14,000 pages of information pertaining to the project.
A full copy of the report has been sent to Premier-designate John Horgan, Green Party leader Andrew Weaver, Liberal leader Christy Clark, all provincial MLAs, Delta MP Carla Qualtrough, the Metro Vancouver board, areas Chambers of Commerce, the Greater Vancouver Gateway Council and the Vancouver and Surrey Boards of Trade.
Harvie will also be presenting the report at Delta’s council meeting this Monday, July 10.