Financing costs for Massey Tunnel replacement total $8 billion on $3.5-billion project.
BC will pay $8 billion in interest over the next 50 years on the George Massey Tunnel replacement bridge, according to an internal government document.
The project backgrounder, which was obtained and released by the BCBC NDP, shows total interest costs for 2017 to 2068 — the entire construction and tolling period to debt retirement — are forecast at $8 billion, before federal assistance.
The figure, which has not previously been revealed, includes $4.9 billion in long-term bonds, $2.2 billion in short-term borrowings and $900 million for a “private partner.”
Project costs are estimated at $3.5 billion, including construction, allowances for inflation and interest during construction.
“The only people that want to build a bridge there are BC Liberals and when we, the Opposition, have asked for information about that cost, we get back blank pages,” said NDP Leader John Horgan. “We were given a leaked document that shows that the actual cost is not the $3 billion it started out as or the $3.5 billion they’re now admitting to, but it could be as high as $12 billion when you build in the interest costs over time.”
In a news release, the Liberals likened the loan to a mortgage and said they would be paying for it over 50 years to keep toll rates low for commuters.
When asked why the cost of the interest payments hadn’t been revealed earlier, Liberal Leader Christy Clark dodged the question, instead focusing on the party’s history as “good money managers” and saying that the bridge will not result in higher taxes.
“It’s going to come in on budget, it’s going to come in on time and we’re going to get it done like we said we would,” Clark said.
The Liberals call the Massey “BC’s worst bottleneck” and have advocated for replacement because they say the tunnel is seismically unsound and difficult for emergency responders to access. Construction on the 3.3-kilometre-long, 10-lane toll bridge is expected to be finished by 2022. Preconstruction work is already underway.
“This has been talked about and thought about for four years,” Clark said.
The NDP platform makes no mention of the Massey Tunnel replacement, but party leader John Horgan has opposed the bridge and talked about twinning being the better option. He’s emphasized that Metro Vancouver mayors — with the exception of Delta Mayor Lois Jackson — also oppose the idea of building the bridge.
The mayors said last summer that they opposed the project because of its cumulative regional impacts and ongoing concerns about an inadequate stakeholder input process and insufficient access to technical information.
Greg Moore, who chairs the Metro Vancouver board of directors, reiterated Friday that the “expensive” bridge has the support of only one local government and does nothing to encourage people to abandon their cars.
“This bridge will have a direct negative effect on the livability of this region,” Moore said.
The Greens have said they would suspend work on the Massey Tunnel replacement pending a “comprehensive and transparent review of alternatives, in cooperation with the Mayors’ Council.”
