Richmond urges premier to halt Massey tunnel replacement bridge.
A report from director of transportation Victor Wei examining alternatives to the proposed bridge was presented to council on Monday, with eight of nine council members supporting the recommendations in the report.
“We have been trying to constructively comment on this proposal from the first day it was announced. We have been disregarded and ignored in the questions that we have asked,” said Mayor Malcolm Brodie. “I think that it’s absolutely critical to the future of our city that there be a re-examination of this project. It’s so important in so many different ways.”
Construction of a controversial 10-lane, $3.5-billion bridge to replace the tunnel is a project that the BC Liberals advocated for while they were in power, but the New Democrats said they would review when they formed a government last week. So far, Premier John Horgan has not said he will cancel the project or stop work.
Site preparation in Richmond and Delta began in April. BC Hydro is also relocating its transmission line from the tunnel to an overhead crossing, and work began on that project in November 2016.
Numerous studies and reports have been produced since the late 1980s regarding the improvement or expansion of the tunnel and Highway 99. It’s generally agreed upon that the congestion around the 58-year-old tunnel is unsustainable and safety improvements need to be made.
Whether the tunnel should be twinned, replaced or decommissioned in favour of a bridge has been hotly debated. Mayors from across the region, with the exception of Delta Mayor Lois Jackson, have expressed serious reservations about the bridge project.
Richmond council has said that it supports a new or improved tunnel versus a bridge. Its concerns include that a bridge will encourage car use, that it’s inconsistent with the regional growth strategy, that the infrastructure will have a negative impact on agricultural land, that traffic will worsen at the Oak Street Bridge, and that if the tunnel is removed the Fraser River will become more industrialized.
Wei’s report presents two alternatives to a replacement bridge, both of which involve improving the existing four-lane Massey Tunnel and adding a second two- or four-lane tunnel that accommodates high-occupancy vehicles and transit.
Both options would include provisions for cyclists and pedestrians.
Limited detailed technical analysis has been conducted. The report states that twinning the tunnel should not cost more than the bridge.
The report also responds to a Delta staff report from earlier this month that uses existing reports and information to emphasize the safety risks associated with the tunnel, the negative implications of replacing or twinning the existing tunnel, and advocates for a replacement bridge.
Delta is concerned about the earthquake risk to the tunnel, which has been seismically upgraded over the years and is expected to be able to withstand a one-in-275-year quake, or magnitude 6.5.
Richmond points out that the tunnel can be upgraded to sustain a one-in-475-year earthquake, which is on par with other major structures such as the Lions Gate, Ironworkers Memorial, Oak Street and Queensborough bridges. It’s estimated that the work will cost $590 million.
A new bridge is expected to withstand a one-in-2,475-year earthquake.
Delta stated that is anticipated that a 10-lane replacement tunnel constructed deeper than the current tunnel would cost $4.3 billion, compared to $3.5 billion for the bridge. Richmond says a crossing with fewer lanes — which would be more consistent with the regional growth strategy — that is not as deep could be built for the same cost as, or less than, the bridge. A smaller project would also mitigate concerns about environmental or land impacts, the report says.
Delta also expressed concern about tunnel safety. But the Richmond report says that according to Insurance Corp. of BC statistics, there were an average of 270 collisions annually at the tunnel and adjacent interchange from 2011 to 2015. During the same period, the Knight Street Bridge and interchanges had an average of 420 crashes per year, and the Alex Fraser had almost 290 crashes per year.
The Richmond report does not address Delta’s concerns about the difficulties first responders have accessing the tunnel.
“This (report) is very thorough for us to go ahead,” said Coun Bill McNulty. “I think there’s solutions to every one of the hiccups that people have put out.”
Coun Carol Day, an outspoken opponent of the bridge, said that considering the soil conditions around the river, twinning the tunnel is the best option.
“It makes more sense to go with what’s been proven,” she said. “We know that a tunnel will work. It’s worked for the last 50 years and it’ll work for another 50.”
Coun Ken Johnston said his biggest fear is that the province won’t consider the alternatives in a timely manner, as suggested in the report.
“Whatever the solution is at the end of the day, as long as it moves along, is expedited and it cleans up the mess that is that horror show of the Massey Tunnel, I’m in full support of it,” Johnston said.
Coun Alexa Loo was the sole voice of opposition, saying twinning offers the public less infrastructure for the same price as a bridge, and she didn’t want to be the one to tell the commuters stuck in traffic every day that relief won’t be coming in the near future.
“I won’t be supporting slowing this process down, creating more bureaucracy and wasting more time,” she said.
