Massey Tunnel must be replaced.
Several reports spanning thousands of pages, including a cost analysis of the alternatives, have been compiled in an overall volume titled The Safety and Economic Imperative for the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project. It's an attempt by the Corporation of Delta to sway the new NDP provincial government, which will be sworn in next week, not to delay or cancel the $3.5-billion bridge.
The report highlights seismic concerns with the tunnel, saying it can't be upgraded to meet today's standards and in its present condition is not physically capable of withstanding a moderate to severe earthquake.
As a result, the tunnel poses an unacceptable risk for the travelling public and first responders, Mayor Lois Jackson and CAO George Harvie stated during a media briefing Monday prior to the report being discussed at Delta council's weekly meeting.
They are urging the provincial government to consider the catastrophic implications of a tunnel failure, including the devastating economic impacts to the region.
The civic report notes seismic upgrades completed in 2006 were only intended to reduce the extent and width of concrete cracks in the tunnel so water ingress rates are low enough to allow motorists to escape in the event of an earthquake.
Jackson, who said she recently had come to the aid of a woman who had crashed in the tunnel, and had to wait for emergency crews, noted the accident rates are high and more severe at the crossing, something that can be reduced with a bridge.
She said it all boils down to politics and a blatant willingness to try to pass off "myths" as fact in order to kill the project and completely ignore the worsening congestion.
"It's a regional boys club and it's like there's nothing you can do. You might as well just go home. It really is, I think, a devastating travesty, for the people and the economy. It's a political thing," said Jackson.
As far as twinning the tunnel, something pushed lately by Richmond Coun Carol Day, Harvie noted she's spreading misinformation, relying on an article from a Popular Mechanics magazine from the 1950s.
The analysis compiled by Delta includes comparison that a second tunnel, which Harvie said would have far more environmental impact, would cost around $4.3 billion.
Maintaining the current tunnel would have an estimated $590 million price tag and wouldn't improve congestion.
Harvie said if the province kills the project, that doesn't mean that money will automatically flow to other projects.
He added only a fraction of vehicles using the tunnel during peak periods are big rigs, so banning them wouldn't provide much relief.
Saying Richmond council has at least acknowledged something needs to be done about the congestion by agreeing to now look at alternatives, Jackson at Monday's council meeting pointed out the tunnel and Highway 99 corridor are a provincial responsibility and not under the purview of the Metro Vancouver Mayors'Council, which doesn't even have the crossing on its agenda.
The rest of her council agreed, taking swipes at Day, Richmond council and regional mayors, whom Jackson said have admitted they want the provincial funding for themselves, particularly for Surrey. Coun Robert Campbell went so far as describing them as "irresponsible and derelict of their duty" and that they're "only interested in their own back yards." Coun Bruce McDonald noted the Metro mayors seem intent on building a hugely expensive underground SkyTrain line to UBC to serve 35,000 students for seven months a year, while 80,000 vehicles a day are using the aging tunnel. He said the other mayors seem willing to jeopardize the people and industries of Delta. Coun Ian Paton, who was elected as the Liberal MLA for Delta South in May, suggested those who don't use the tunnel during peak periods should "come out and give it a whirl." Coun Sylvia Bishop said there can't be a delay in replacing the structure but the other mayors don't seem willing to find a solution, and only want to say no.