Protesters crash groundbreaking for bridge to replace Massey Tunnel.
'Celebration' was planned to mark start of construction of bridge to replace George Massey Tunnel.
A pre-election photo op to "celebrate" the start of construction on the $3.5-billion bridge to replace the George Massey Tunnel did not go as planned for BC Transportation Minister Todd Stone on Wednesday.
The event, featuring local politicians and other supporters of the mega project, was supposed to be held outside, with a backhoe ready to break ground.
However, Stone was delayed — by traffic in the Massey Tunnel, he said — and protesters with placards and megaphones took the stage instead, pretending to be Stone handing over a "blank cheque" to Port Metro Vancouver.
"It's illogical. It's basically a monument to the car," said Richmond city councillor Carol Day, who was among the protesters.
"It's a major taxpayer waste of money."
'Best interests' of BC says Stone
The event, which included Stone, Delta Mayor Lois Jackson and others, moved quickly inside a nearby fire hall.
Stone told reporters there is widespread public support for the new 10-lane bridge to replace the aging tunnel connecting Richmond to Delta.
"We respect [the protesters'] rights to make those views known," said Stone.
"That said, we also have an obligation to do what we believe is in the best interests of British Columbians," calling the bridge a "critical piece of infrastructure."
The minister says it has taken four years of consultation with First Nations, municipal and regional governments and a tremendous amount of technical work to get to the point where construction can now begin.
Stone said protesters are entitled to present their opinion during the May 9 election.
Major contracts not yet awarded
Opposition to the bridge goes beyond the dozens of protesters gathered Wednesday morning.
Metro Vancouver mayors spoke out collectively against the project last summer, saying the bridge was "car-oriented" and diverting money from public transit and other transportation priorities.
Today's event was billed as the start of construction, though major contracts have not yet been awarded, according to a government release.
Two contracts worth $17.3-million or less than one per cent of the overall project have been awarded to two Surrey companies to prepare the site for work.
The province expects the major construction contract to be awarded in the summer.
