Silent majority must let Horgan know.
It has been heartening to see all of the letters submitted in favour of the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project in recent weeks. It seems the prospect of a NDP government scrapping the project has brought many from the silent majority that are in favour of the bridge into the discussion.
Yet, despite all of the fact checking, a number of myths still continue to be perpetuated, most recently in a letter submitted by Richmond Coun Carol Day.
Notwithstanding Day's claim to the contrary, it is not the case that a twinned tunnel could be completed in half the time and at half the cost of a bridge replacement. In fact, building a new tunnel to the same seismic standards of a bridge will be much more costly, not only in the construction phase, but in the future decades of maintenance that will be required.
Let's not forget that whether now or in a few years, the aging and seismically unsafe tunnel will need to be replaced. The cost of tearing out this existing tunnel and replacing it with a new one will be significant.
Further, unlike a new bridge, the construction of which will not require new dredging of the Fraser River and will actually result in a net gain of farmland, a twinned tunnel would require extensive dredging, and would have a significantly higher impact on agricultural land and marine life.
Day's comments on transit are also incorrect. The new bridge will be fully capable of accommodating rapid transit. In fact, rapid transit capacity was one of the principle considerations when opting to move forward with a bridge in the first place.
Most importantly, Day's timeline for construction is way off. Anyone who thinks the NDP would move immediately into the construction of a new tunnel after rejecting this project is living in a dream world.
Get ready for years of consultation, planning and inaction. If this project is scrapped, Delta will be forgotten as funds go instead towards transit projects in other parts of the Lower Mainland.
If you are a part of the silent majority that sits in traffic every day, and is ready for a tunnel replacement now, and not in 20 years, email John Horgan and let him know.