ANALYSIS OF GEORGE MASSEY TUNNEL REPLACEMENT PROJECT
A comprehensive review of Metro Vancouver’s interests and the potential anticipated impacts of the Project on Metro Vancouver assets, infrastructure and legislated responsibilities is provided below. This analysis has been prepared based on available but limited information regarding this Project.
Regional Planning and Growth Management
The proposed Project will have implications for regional growth management, including land use, transportation, agriculture and human health impacts. With a key focus of the Project on expanding road / highway capacity by the construction of a new bridge, there are many aspects of the proposed Project that appear to be inconsistent with the direction of Metro 2040, the regional growth strategy. While MOTI proposes that the Project design is based on assumptions that the Urban Containment Boundary will not change, and has taken account of municipal plans, experience, both direct and as documented in research related to relevant transportation infrastructure projects indicates that there is a strong likelihood that the Project will have effects on growth management and land use plans. For example, it may result in impacts on the distribution and growth of traffic, in choices about the location of businesses and households, and in overall potentially substantial land use shifts that differ from the regional vision and municipal plans that have been pursued over many decades. The result may be increased pressures for land use conversion, including the conversion of agricultural and industrial land. The current information is incomplete in many regards, including documentation related to potential land use impacts of new highway interchanges, the transportation effects of the new bridge on the regional transportation system, human health impacts, the impact of decommissioning the Tunnel on irrigation water for agriculture, and others.
Regional Parks 
The proposed Project is expected to follow the alignment of the existing Tunnel, bisecting Deas Island Regional Park through the existing MOTI right‐of‐way. The proposed bridge and the associated BC Hydro transmission relocation project will permanently change the character of the park, have an impact on visitor experience, and create permanent noise, debris and visual impacts. Construction activities from both projects will have negative impacts on park visitors’ experience and will result in vegetation removal, thereby impacting habitat. The potential exists to improve trail connectivity between the sides of Deas Park; however, these potential benefits are diminished by the impact of the proposed 10‐lane bridge along with the transmission line towers. At this stage, insufficient information is known about how the land under the bridge will be designed and used, making it difficult to understand associated impacts on connectivity through the Regional Park.
Regional Utilities
The proposed Project affects both the regional water supply system and the regional liquid waste system. In particular, the River Road West Main in Delta, the Lulu Island‐Delta Main in Richmond and crossing under the Fraser River into Delta, along with the Brighouse Branch Sewer North, may all be impacted by the Project. New information provided in MOTI’s Environmental Assessment Application indicates that additional highway improvement works are planned for the section of the Project extending north to the Oak Street Bridge in Richmond. Therefore, the potential impacts to the regional water supply and liquid waste systems are greater than previously reported. Both the Lulu Island‐Delta Main and the River Road West Main are critical components of the regional water system supplying residents, businesses and industry south of the Fraser River as well as back‐ feeding the City of Richmond during an emergency. Loss of either of these mains would have a significant impact on water supply to Richmond and Delta. It is imperative that both mains be adequately monitored and protected throughout all phases of the proposed construction work and that there are no interruptions or reductions in service, especially during the peak summer water demand period. As shown on Attachment 4, given the proposed additional works within the expanded project area, and the configuration of the regional system supplying Richmond and Delta, there would be critical risks to water supply in the event construction of all project components within the Richmond/Delta corridor proceed on a concurrent basis, regardless of the time of year.    MOTI recognizes the importance of Metro Vancouver’s infrastructure, and has committed to working closely with Metro Vancouver staff to ensure the integrity of regional utilities. In their Application, MOTI has indicated that given the current stage of project design, detailed utility relocation requirements have not yet been finalized. Protection and possible relocation of utilities will be the responsibility of the Contractor retained by MOTI to design and build the bridge and highway improvements. Details of works pertaining to utilities will be confirmed during final design.   While Metro Vancouver’s Lulu Island‐Delta Main crossing the Fraser River downstream of the Project site is not directly adjacent to the Project works and will not require relocation, this portion of the Main may be affected by tunnel decommissioning. Further modelling of river hydraulics and river bed lowering is required in this regard.
Relocation of BC Hydro Transmission Line
As noted in previous sections in this report, BC Hydro is planning to relocate a 230‐kilovolt transmission line that currently spans the length of the Tunnel to coincide with the proposed George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project. Although BC Hydro has not yet announced which of three relocation alternatives it will implement, it is continuing to study Alternative 1, an overhead transmission line crossing the Fraser River. Metro Vancouver has both regional utility and regional park assets located in close proximity, and may experience direct and cumulative impacts to these assets. Regional Park ecology, visitor experience, and view sheds will be impacted and similarly, the construction of the new transmission line may have impacts on the above‐noted regional water supply mains.