The Risk is Imminent
Analysis has shown that the tunnel structure is fairly certain to be damaged in the design seismic event with or without ground improvements.
Risk of a major earthquake is imminent – 30% chance in next 50 years.
Earthquake standards – The tunnel is designed to withstand a 1‐in‐275 year quake (6.5 magnitude – 18% probability of exceedance in 50 years).
2001 Nisqually earthquake was 6.8 magnitude – The bridge is designed to withstand a 1‐in‐2,475 year quake (9.0 magnitude – 2% probability of exceedance in 50 years).
It is not technically feasible to upgrade the tunnel to meet current seismic standards.
Public Safety Risk – Collisions
The tunnel has a higher than average crash rate and tunnel crashes tend to be more severe than crashes on open roads.
Average of >300 collisions annually, 40% resulted in injury or fatality. 
A new bridge would reduce collision rates by >35%
Public Safety Risk – First Responders
There is a possibility of loss of life if the tunnel experiences catastrophic displacements in a seismic event.
Incidents in the tunnel are often associated with an unacceptable delay in response times and the provision of critical care.
Traffic and the lack of a travel shoulder make accidents difficult to reach and clear.
First Responders are forced in some cases to respond on foot carrying emergency equipment 
Smoke and fire create additional hazards in a confined space and require a below grade response.
A tunnel failure would sever a vital emergency response lifeline nearly 25 ambulance trips through the tunnel each day (6.3 of those trips are code 3 – lights and sirens).
Impact on the Entire Metro Vancouver Region
Approximately 400,000 trips use the four Fraser River crossings each day. 
A seismic event causing the failure of the tunnel would likely cause the failure of the Pattullo Bridge.
157,000 (80,000 from the tunnel and 77,000 from the Pattullo Bridge) vehicles/day would need an alternate crossing – Alex Fraser Bridge has no spare capacity.
The current 16 km trip from Ladner to Richmond Centre would become 36 km trip over Alex Fraser Bridge, 77 km over the Port Mann Bridge.
Economic and Quality of Life Impacts
The potential for liquefaction of the upper sand deposits is high in an earthquake.
This would lead to major movements of the foundation soils and distortions of the tunnel tube.
Failure would be regionally disruptive, locally unbearable, and economically devastating.
The economic impacts would be long‐term, far reaching and impact the entire region.
The Tunnel is a critical component of the local, regional and provincial economies, essential for Asia‐ Pacific trade.
Resulting traffic paralysis would severely impact quality of life in North Delta, Surrey, and beyond.
Importance of Public Transit
The tunnel carries more transit passengers than any other non‐rapid transit crossing of the Fraser River: 10,000 riders/day, 1 bus every 3 minutes during rush hour 
AM peak – 60% of trips to downtown Vancouver from South Delta and South Surrey are by transit.
Bridge project includes $500 million of new transit infrastructure: – 50 km of new dedicated transit/HOV lanes – Integrated transit stops – Space for future rapid transit – Dedicated transit on ramp.
Pedestrians and Cyclist Facilities
The new bridge will provide pedestrian/cyclist connectivity between Delta and Richmond: Continuation of existing cycling networks at the only crossing with a broken cycling link 
Existing bike shuttle does not operate on weekends in the winter months (Nov‐Mar) – Shuttle is very inefficient and is a limiting factor to public use yet still transports an average of 900 cyclists/month.