She noted that federal rules did not require B.C.’s Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure to submit a project description to the federal environmental assessment agency for consideration.	Sent POS: 8	Sent Len: 27	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, ministry, federal, infrastructure
He questions why the bridge is going to be built on 2,000 feet of waterlogged sand and mud in an area assessed at moderate to high risk of liquefaction in the event of an earthquake.	Sent POS: 11	Sent Len: 35	Topic Word: fact, sand
“I appreciate your bringing your concerns to my attention,” McKenna wrote in her letter.	Sent POS: 10	Sent Len: 14	Topic Word: Mckenna, letter
If one is to believe the misleading information about the condition and the safety of the George Massey Tunnel, it should be closed immediately.	Sent POS: 3	Sent Len: 24	Topic Word: condition, Massey
In her letter, McKenna said she considered the facts provided by Metro Vancouver, the provincial and federal regulatory mechanisms in place and the potential environmental effects of the project before deciding not to designate the project for environmental assessment.	Sent POS: 7	Sent Len: 39	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, fact, federal, provincial, Mckenna, letter
The decision states that the project “will be constructed and operated in a way that ensures no significant adverse effects are likely to occur.”	Sent POS: 4	Sent Len: 24	Topic Word: significant
Last week, the provincial ministers of environment and community, sport and cultural development concluded that “no significant adverse effects are likely to occur from the project” and issued an environmental assessment certificate to the Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure for the project.	Sent POS: 14	Sent Len: 42	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, ministry, infrastructure, provincial, significant
Morrison also noted a 1995 Geological Survey of Canada paper estimated the depth to bedrock at the bridge site at 600 to 700 metres (1,970 to 2,300 feet), something not disputed by the ministry.	Sent POS: 9	Sent Len: 34	Topic Word: ministry, Canada
Morrison said other regional bridges were built on piles penetrating 80 to 100 metres into the ground, bottoming in thick and extensive layers of hard, dense clay, sand and gravel that provided the necessary foundation strength.	Sent POS: 13	Sent Len: 36	Topic Word: sand
“The province has a very robust environmental assessment process similar to that of the federal government.	Sent POS: 12	Sent Len: 16	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, federal
It was similar to a letter the Tsawwassen resident submitted to the Optimist in which he cited the fact that boreholes drilled by a ministry contractor on the north and south shores of the Fraser River in 2013 went to a depth of 335 metres (1,100 feet) without reaching bedrock.	Sent POS: 7	Sent Len: 50	Topic Word: ministry, fact, letter
They cherry picked their so-called facts from old reports that were jerry rigged to substantiate the provincial Liberal government and the Port of Vancouver condemnation and removal of the George Massey Tunnel, and accommodate the industrialization of the lower Fraser River.	Sent POS: 2	Sent Len: 41	Topic Word: fact, provincial, Massey
“Thousands of hours of professional geotechnical and bridge structural engineering have been dedicated to ensuring that the new George Massey replacement bridge and its supports are appropriately designed for conditions at the crossing site and for a major seismic event,” the ministry explained.	Sent POS: 21	Sent Len: 43	Topic Word: ministry, condition, sand, major, Massey
The 10-lane, $3.5-billion bridge that is planned to replace the Massey Tunnel has been given the environmental green light from the B.C. Ministry of Environment.	Sent POS: 1	Sent Len: 25	Topic Word: environmental, ministry, Massey
McKenna said the project was subject to a provincial environmental assessment, and if the project proceeds the proponent will have to obtain federal authorizations from Fisheries and Oceans Canada and Transport Canada.	Sent POS: 9	Sent Len: 32	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, federal, provincial, Mckenna, Canada
The Fact Sheet, which compares other deep foundation bridges in B.C. and around the world, also provides a case against the existing tunnel and building a new one.	Sent POS: 23	Sent Len: 28	Topic Word: fact
The footings for the bridge to replace the George Massey Tunnel will hold firm, the Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure has assured following questions about the structural integrity of the $3.5-billion project.	Sent POS: 1	Sent Len: 32	Topic Word: ministry, infrastructure, Massey
Last June, Metro wrote another letter outlining its concerns to B.C.’s minister of transportation, the B.C. Environmental Assessment Office, the premier and the federal environment ministry.	Sent POS: 3	Sent Len: 26	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, ministry, federal, office, letter
The Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure said in an email that it is aware of McKenna’s decision.	Sent POS: 11	Sent Len: 17	Topic Word: ministry, infrastructure, Mckenna
As well, federal government agencies are part of the provincial Environmental Assessment Office’s technical working group on the project,” the ministry said.	Sent POS: 13	Sent Len: 22	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, ministry, federal, provincial, office
We must not allow the manipulation of the facts to destroy a perfectly good crossing when there are better solutions that would cost less money and be less destructive to the very environment in which any additional new crossing would be built.	Sent POS: 6	Sent Len: 42	Topic Word: fact
The report on the George Massey Tunnel Replacement Project issued by Mayor Lois Jackson and CAO George Harvie needs to be answered.	Sent POS: 1	Sent Len: 22	Topic Word: Massey
The board wrote to Minister of Environment and Climate Change Catherine McKenna early last year, urging her to order an environmental assessment for the $3.5-billion bridge project (under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act).	Sent POS: 2	Sent Len: 33	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, Mckenna
This followed a review by the B.C. Environmental Assessment Office.	Sent POS: 15	Sent Len: 10	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, review, office
After a request for further information from the Optimist, the ministry released a “Fact Sheet” this week on the geotechnical issues regarding the 10-lane structure that will span the Fraser River delta and its soft soils on either side.	Sent POS: 2	Sent Len: 39	Topic Word: ministry, fact
Why have the hundreds of immersed tunnels around the world that are much older than the George Massey Tunnel not been decommissioned? My suggestion is that the new provincial NDP government ignore the Delta report and request Tunnel Engineering Consultants, one the world's top experts in immersed tunnel construction, to review the condition and life of the George Massey Tunnel and suggest what improvements could be made immediately to make it safe and usable for many years to come.	Sent POS: 4	Sent Len: 79	Topic Word: condition, review, provincial, Massey
The environmental assessment took those concerns into account, according to the Ministry of Environment.	Sent POS: 10	Sent Len: 14	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, ministry
However, according to the ministry, full scale test piles and extensive geotechnical subsurface studies undertaken since 2014 confirmed the heavy loads can be supported.	Sent POS: 17	Sent Len: 24	Topic Word: ministry
The Massey Tunnel replacement project will not be subject to a federal environmental review, according to a letter sent to Metro Vancouver’s board of directors.	Sent POS: 1	Sent Len: 25	Topic Word: environmental, federal, review, letter, Massey
The review, led by the Environmental Assessment Office, resulted in approval with 33 legally-enforceable conditions, including the right for Aboriginal groups to monitor construction and the requirement that impacts on animal and fish habitats and ecosystems are mitigated.	Sent POS: 2	Sent Len: 38	Topic Word: environmental, assessment, condition, review, office
Tunnel Engineering Consultants from Rotterdam should also be asked to determine the feasibility and cost of a second tunnel upriver from the present George Massey Tunnel.	Sent POS: 5	Sent Len: 26	Topic Word: Massey
The certificate came with 33 legally binding conditions covering a number of areas, including fish and fish habitat, marine access, traffic, Aboriginal consultation and monitoring, and assessing or managing cumulative environmental effects.	Sent POS: 16	Sent Len: 32	Topic Word: environmental, condition
In a letter sent recently to B.C. NDP Leader John Horgan, retired engineer Tom Morrison reiterated concerns raised by other bridge opponents when it comes to structural issues, particularly foundation challenges they say could skyrocket the price or prevent the bridge from being built altogether.	Sent POS: 5	Sent Len: 45	Topic Word: letter
Below the soft spoils is a very dense, strong layer that is several hundred metres thick, while the new bridge foundation design calls for ground improvements to prevent sand near the surface from liquefying in the event of an earthquake.	Sent POS: 19	Sent Len: 40	Topic Word: sand
It also found that the bridge would “eliminate” congestion delays and idling currently commonplace at the Massey Tunnel.	Sent POS: 3	Sent Len: 18	Topic Word: Massey
“Bridging major rivers through soft deltaic soils is a challenge that bridge engineers have developed and honed over the centuries of bridge foundation design,” the ministry document states.	Sent POS: 3	Sent Len: 28	Topic Word: ministry, major
